---
title: "SLP455 Anant Tapadia - Single Sig or Multi Sig?"
transcript_by: nully0x via review.btctranscripts.com
media: https://anchor.fm/s/7d083a4/podcast/play/64348045/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2023-1-1%2Ff7fafb12-9441-7d85-d557-e9e5d18ab788.mp3
tags: ["multisig"]
speakers: ["Stephan Livera","Anant Tapadia"]
categories: ["podcast"]
date: 2023-02-01
---

 Hi, you're listening to Stefan Le Verapodcast, a show about Bitcoin and Austrian economic expertise by Swan Bitcoin. Today we're exploring whether you should use single signature or multi signature for your bigger hotling stack. Now of course for day to day spending or certain specific scenarios you may not be thinking about multi-seek but here we're talking more about your hotling and my guest today is an art tapadea from Bit Hive and their team behind Hexawollet and recently Kipper. This show is brought to you by Swan Bitcoin, the easy way to buy Bitcoin and also learn about Bitcoin. Are you looking to add Bitcoin to your corporate balance sheet? It's never been easier with Swan Bitcoin, Treasury Solutions. With Swan Bitcoin Treasury, you can automate your Bitcoin investment, custody and management strategy and you will get expert guidance every step along the way. Now if you are operating a business and you have employees, consider Swan's Bitcoin benefit plan. So basically you can pick an amount and give that to your employees and this makes it easier for you to recruit reward, retain top talent. Swan handles all the heavy lifting like creating worlds, converting currency, routing payments and like magic your employees receive Bitcoin and world class financial education monthly as a benefit from you. So if you're interested go to swan.com slash business. On L2 is a community for Bitcoin builders by Blockstream. This is an initiative and community led effort by contributors and companies building on core lightning and the liquid network. It's an interactive community platform. So if you are a builder, whether you are a product manager, a designer or an engineer, you can come together through events. There will be mentorship programs available to fast track your success and also a community space to learn something new alongside other Bitcoin is building the future of Bitcoin layer two. Sign up now for early access on the platform. It's build on L2.com. Are you still using a plain old Block Explorer? Mimple.space shows you the multi-layer ecosystem of Bitcoin. Mimple.space is a comprehensive Bitcoin explorer that covers this ecosystem from the Mimple to the blockchain to secondly networks like the lightning network. With Mimple.space, there's no need to trust the third party. It's free and open source. You can host it yourself with one click on various full-node distributions. Now if you are with an enterprise, remember Mimple.space offers custom Mimple instances you can have your company's branding, increased API limits and so much more. Go find out over at mimple.space slash enterprise. And now onto the show with Unant. Anant, welcome back to the show. Yes, you've earned. Thanks for coming in. So there's been a lot going on. I think the conversation around learning to self-custodies always an important wine. It's always one that's very fresh on my mind as well. And so we're seeing a lot of discussion. I think recently of course there was the news about Luke Dashia losing his coins. I think I don't know exactly how many but probably something in the range of 200 Bitcoin. So a series of anacorn. And so there's been a lot of people making some noise about this statement. Right? They've been saying, oh, look, even if a Bitcoin core developer couldn't secure his coins and what hope does the average person have? They've been saying this kind of narrative. Of course, I disagree with that strongly. So I wonder how are you think about that? See, self-custody, I would not like to claim that self-custody is, you know, the mentally the easiest things to do. It is a new way to secure your stuff. So it is going to be, there are mental hurdles where people are trying to do it. There are going to be new things that people have to learn. And it does not come without self-responsibility. So no matter how developers and builders want to make it easier, it doesn't come without learning and it doesn't come without self-responsibility. Having said that and having understood that this is journey even five years done in the last event, we'll be talking about self-custody. And why self-custody, what other things can make self-custody more secure like them, any word proposal or any new, odd court people are proposing. So there will always be improvements in self-custody. And the new one, you can see words that we use, that was not obvious there. So what I'm trying to say is that the self-custody is a journey. There is no perfect self-custody solution. And also self-custody solution is very personal. So in case of specifically the incident you're talking about, it is very specific and a very, very niche case. It's not going to, it's to, it doesn't really, it is more for foot. It doesn't really apply to normal users. No one is going to probably have like a custom security solution like he had. It's almost non-issue for regular horrors. But he has there is an aspect of if a start questioning okay, is there self-custody solution proper? Is it, you know, there is something more than they can do about it and you know the whole conversation starts again. And this is going to happen again and again. But as you will me know and what I've understood from that situation, most of it was honestly, it is more preferred because I don't know if there was even a core storage gailing work, the way we term core storage air gap storage. So there are moving parts and it is a developing story. We don't know how the details are. So once we know all the details are fit, probably there will be some learnings out of it. But we already know that you know you shouldn't roll your own self-custody solution to be being stuff that is very custom-pre- yourself and it is not really something with people who have used and tried and have to be not tried and tested. So these are the few things that you can already talk about that incident. So to the whole question around should people self-custody, what we end up having is a lot of conversation around what is the best way, right? We see people saying, oh just, you know, multi-signature is too complex. People say things like you should only do single signature with a pass phrase. That seems to be if I had to assess, let's say the meta on Bitcoin Twitter or online discussion, that seems to be the meta. They say, oh multi-sign, it is in the too hard basket for most people. Obviously, I disagree again. I think it is more like, you know, if you are a beginner, you should use maybe a guided solution, like have a professional help you. And intermediates and advanced level people you can learn. It is not that hard. I'm saying it. I'm curious how you see it, like single signature or multi-signature. See, we first of all, as you know, RSTs have been making the Bitcoin products for a while and we come from a single-signature word. Exhausted is a single-signature solution. It has all the aspects of typical-signature solution or what a wallet does. And we can come to the deconstruction of the wallet which will probably really help some of the listeners. But essentially, we come from that space. So definitely a very neat solution for people who are just getting started or people who have, you know, you know, small amount of money, obviously that is subjected. But essentially, you know, not like life savings or stuff . They will ship you some hardware devices if you need them and they will do a call with you and walk you through that process. An unchained have a really easy platform to use, which is perfect for you if you are a beginner and you just need some help to guide you through this process. They also have an inheritance checklist which comes as part of the concierge onboarding program so this can help you in terms of having things like a step-by-step checklist, letters for the executor or trustee and other things. Go to unchained.com slash concierge to get this. And finally, coincites.com, are my favorite producer of hardware signing devices. Most notably the cold card, but they have a range of products and gear that you will find really handy. With the cold card obviously it's one of the most popular Bitcoin hardware signing devices. You can use it in single signature or you can use it as part of a multi signature and it has all these features that really make it easy for you to do that. So you can register the multi signature forum. You can check the addresses on the device which gives you some more security. You can initialise the whole thing offline without even connecting to a computer. So there's so many features and it's such a reliable and versatile player that you can use as part of your Bitcoin security setup. Go to coincite.com, audio-cold cards and other gear there. Use code Lavera and you'll get a discount on your cold cards. Now back to the show. Yeah, I guess it's just an extra layer of verification, right? And certainly these are things that you do when you set up your multi-seagrant. And so I think this is a great way for people to give themselves that piece of mind as well because this is one of those things that's really kind of crazy but it's this idea that the keys can be ported are portable in a way that you can take the key like theoretically. I could have set up that same key in like a treasure but then imported into a cold card and it's going to sign the same way. It's going to sign the same coins in a way. So that's kind of useful and that's a step that people are doing to help verify. Okay, my access to my coins is, you know, or another one that people might do is do a test recovery, right? Like let me send you know $30 into this multi-seagrant and then just practice, oh I've lost one of the devices or I've lost this other thing, can I recover? You know, have I have I have the right pieces together to be able to recover? If something goes wrong and then this can give you that extra piece of mind. Okay, I was able to recover. Okay, I'm safe, right? That. And the best part is if you notice that every single user doesn't have to do this, if a lot of users have done it initially or you know some users do it regularly, then if any of these pieces, if any one of the coordinating software, any one of the hardware devices trying to do something funny, they'll be caught. So the incentive to actually try and steal funds when there are a lot of entities involved is actually reduced. So this is the very, very key part, see one of the things in Bitcoin we know is the securities also because of the numbers, right? Because there are so many private keys possible, it's not easy to guess them. It is not the same scale but the idea is if you have multiple entities, then you can minimize trust in any one of them. You don't need to test a-card endings of the user, no the one. I don't need to use a signing device, I can use another one, right? So as these things develop and we have like 12 or 13 signing devices available now of S5 or 6 coordinate or apps available now. So this becomes easier and easier and people will get more and more confident about it. There's a lot more talking about it, lot more education that includes about it, people who are listening to this podcast might come back with questions, they might feel slightly more comfortable. So things are converging with standard with the ecosystem and the education and I'm like you're like you're a server, I'm also a very bullish on policy. Yeah, yeah and so let's talk about spending now. So let's say I've set up my 203 and now I want to send some coins to you on our. So I say I'm asking me an address, I'm going to pay you you know 0.01 Bitcoin or whatever, what steps do I go through? Perfect. So if I give you an address and you have a two or three month as accept, the first thing to do is to check that address, I probably have you know I'm showing it showing it to you on a screen or I have you know message you that particular address. So when you when you put that address in your coordinating software and the coordinating software would probably take you know produce a B.S.B.T transaction, you would take it to your first hardware device. On that hardware device, the first thing is to make sure that you check whether that send to addresses character or not. That's the first step. The like I said, the change addresses automatically checked if that particular device is registered. Okay. So these are the two checks that happen during sending, if all the device are registered. So all you have to do because they're successfully registered. If you have chosen the right wallet from the from the signing device, then these are the these are the checks that happen. And I think maybe it's also so obviously in this case it's a two or three. So I'd have to go and let's say I have one device at home and then another device in a vault or some other location somewhere, I have to go to that other location and do a get the signature from that device or from that signing device to get the second signature, bring that back to you know the coordinating application. So in this case if it's cheaper or Spector or Sparrow or whatever and then once I've ingested that second PSBT signature, then it'll say, ah, this transaction is now valid and you can broadcast it, right? Absolutely. Yeah. I think you have to explain the user steps really well. So those are the checks that happen at one place, but then you take it to another location. The same kind of check you can do there. You can check there a saving address at your own office or any other location you have. Then you put it back to the coordinating software, not the coordinate software, because a specific transaction has been same and there's no way to further coordinating out because it doesn't have the private keys to change it. You can let the coordinating app, you know, broadcast the transaction. Right. And I think one other point just on practicality that might be useful for some people. I think I've been because I've been playing around with devices for years, right? So I think for me in practice I have found there are times where QR's can be difficult, right? So because the QR flow, like as an example, if your it depends on the device you're using, sometimes the resolution is bad or the the camera on the other devices bad. And so one tip that I've found useful is if you can have the QR scanning device, that could be maybe your home device. And then if you've got like one that's in a vault, as an example, and you might have a mix, right? You might have a mix in your core, and so then the devices in the vault maybe they can be a little bit easier to have a microSD for signing because they are a little, I think it depends on the flow, right? It depends on the coordinating app and everything, but if you just have a microSD card and you're just going into the vault area or into an office or somewhere, then maybe it's a little easier to kind of get the signature done because if you're kind of out in a remote location and you're trying to scan the QR and the signature is not working and things like this where it can be a bit difficult, right? So I think in that case it might be a little easier. Now of course there is NFC as well, so there's NFC devices, things like the the tap signer is an example, but I guess there is one downside with devices like the tap signer is you're getting less, yeah, because you can't check the addresses on this thing, you can't, there's less that you can check about the transaction. So, you know, there's tradeoffs with all of these things, it is a cheaper device, but I guess if you're storing serious, serious money, well then maybe you're going for the device, the bigger devices with a screen and with a keypad and things like this. So those are a few tips I guess that I would just offer for listeners as well, when you're thinking about if you're crafting your own multi-seg. Yeah, okay, so let's talk a little bit about the backups and the output descriptor and BSMS, can you decipher a little bit of this, at least, current state of play as we talk, you know, today's the 31st of January 2023, what's the current state of play with multi-seg and backups? See one thing, even I want to mention because it's a very important point, when you are keeping something in the shape, and you want to use as decar versus QR code, one of the things people forget is some of these devices used to not have a battery, right? So what you don't want to do is actually get that device back into your home and then do this stuff and then take it back, right? So if you have it in a safe, it is not about idea either that, you know, most of the new devices, that's where they have some kind of battery, the new ledgers, the G8, they have battery, or if you have like cold card, that requires a battery, this is not a battery, you just carry the battery with you. So carry the battery and as you can see, you can see, you can see, you know, just do the piece there, either through QR code or SD card and then come back, do not carry the sign, you don't have to carry the sign and do it back, you can keep it back to you. Right, yes, so just to explain there, so the idea here is let's say we've got a two or three multi-seag and just doing like a big amount of coin on this or whatever, the whole point is to not have to have like, okay, yes, at the start, when you set up that core, yes, all three devices can be in the same location because you haven't put any coins on there, but once you put coins on, then you don't want to bring them back together because theoretically you're vulnerable at that point, right? Like if a criminal or a someone comes to, you know, try to attack you at that point, you're vulnerable. Yes, even at creation actually because the way P is between multi-seagors is not really interactive that is, you can actually not have them at the same location, they need one of them. Right, yeah, of course, yeah, so you can do one important, you know, so it's one important, you know, one of the other, yeah, I mean, I was just saying more from a practicality because you might want to let's say you want to set it up and then test recovery, test with small amounts, before you separate the devices and put them into, you know, different locations, one in the mountain, one in the, you know, one in the vault, one in the office, one in the, you know, somewhere, so I think that's probably where I was saying that just from a practicality point of you, but then once they, once you put the coins on there, like serious coin on there, then you don't want to pull them together because now, you know, that's where the risk is. So anyway, we're spoken about that. Let's get back to the backup question. So, you know, typically this means you save a PDR for an output descriptor or BSMS, he tells what's the current state of play there. Yeah. So, so why do we need these, these output descriptors or work competitions because even if you have two of the three keys, you cannot recover your phone, right? I just want to repeat that in a multi-sick, if you let's say in a three or five multi-sick, it doesn't mean that if you have three of the five keys, you can completely, you can not completely, you cannot even recover any of your funds. The reason being is that, okay, you have the three keys to the safe, let's imagine another safe, right? So, you have three keys of the safe and you can open the safe, but how do you find that safe, right? How do you get to that safe? That is the map, you know, in that terms, is what the word configuration is and that word configuration or the multi-sick configuration finds contains the map details that it's basically contained, the other public details of the key that you would need to unlock your funds basically or get access to your funds. Just just to want to be clear why multi-sick configuration finds are so important. Now, that is where things like output descriptors and you know, BSMS and all these things come through. So, output descriptor is it's a very neat standard, it takes care of all the different aspects of what a configuration means. Configuration doesn't just mean the expo, also means the path and the script type that you're using and start writing them, right? So, that is what forms output descriptor in a simple sense, I'm not getting into time login multi-sick yet, but that's an output descriptor. And if you have the output descriptor and if you have the minimum number of keys, you can definitely access the funds. If you have three keys of the file, and you have the multi-sick configuration file or output descriptor, you do not need the other two keys. That's the importance of it. I'll put descriptor as a format, which a lot of wallets use. Now, there are like as a there are multiple pieces in there, like the expo of the path, the you know master fingerprint, the script type. So, these are the part of output descriptor. I would say an improvement to that is the BSMS, which is bit coin, secure, multi-sick setup, I think, but BSMS essentially has the output descriptors given a specific output descriptor template, but it also has some other details. One very neat detail that BSMS has is actually it has the first address of the multi-sick, right? I really like this part and why that is important. So, let's imagine you have these five devices. One of the option after registration is you go away and check all these five devices for all the expobs, all the paths and all the derivations in this and that. There's one we are going it. But, alternatively what you could do is you could, if it's a normal multi-sick, you can just check the first address, right? Because the first address is a derivation of all these components. So, if the first address is correct, or is it it's matching across the five devices, then there is no way they could have changed one of the expobs, or they could have changed one of the paths because they will not get the first receiving address. So, by checking one piece, you have to check, you have actually checked multiple of these, multiple of these items, right? As you were mentioning, the BSMS has the first address and so you were saying that basically because the first address has to be the same, then it's I guess you're saying that's the reason why you find it useful as a wallet developer when you're coding or making and building this, right? Even from a user point of view, instead of checking for like five different things, you have to check all the cosine and expobs, so you have to check five expobs, plus they'll have to check the five derivation paths, plus they will have to check the five you know script types, because any of this going wrong, where you mean that it's a completely different world. So, if instead of that what you could do, in a simple case, there are complex case where there doesn't apply, but in a simple case what that means is if you would check the first address, you essentially have to check all the input parameters to the first address. So, if I check this one address across the five device, I know it is the right registration. So, these are the kind of you know improvement that are happening from a standard point of view, and that is why I said the general standards are leading the world's better UX in the multi-six space. I say, yeah, okay, and so let's talk a little bit about capabilities specifically, let's talk a little bit about some of the, sorry, one other thing. So, with this whole output descriptor BSMS, I guess the important point just for people to remember is that you can keep multiple backups of this. Now, yes, it impacts your privacy, but it helps your redundancy and your ability to recover something goes wrong. So, this piece, this output descriptor, the BSMS, the wallet configuration file, whatever it's called, make sure you have multiple backups of that. You might even think about having a copy of that with your lawyer or someone who you're doing inheritance planning with because it'll be a central as part of the recovery process there. So, that's just something to keep in mind. One more thing you could prove in those files is which is very practicalist. If you have the same devices, let's say in a safe, you can keep a copy there. If you have like three devices in three safe, in three different locations, this keep one copy with each of them. So, even if you carry USB, one I mean, yeah, or you can just like have it in an PDF or something. So, that seeds that's nothing for you right like so it's it's important to think about the perspective yeah sorry I'm just on that point we did some you know back of them look at vision but like I said a typical multi-sick today cost five hundred right and let's say even if you have bit coins worth five thousand dollars which is probably you know a quarter of a bit coin a point to bit coin depending on the price that that will mean you know something around five to ten percent of the security cost nine in bitcoin you know that it can ten eggs very easily and if it does ten eggs then it will become like one percent of your one percent of your cost having a security cost of one percent to secure the whole amount is a decent security cost right so if you think about it in those terms and have you know put in some hours of effort actually like you know you have orders of magnitude better security and the cost is not really I it is one percent of the potential so that's that's probably one way to think about it yeah yeah okay so I think that's the multi-seag aspect let's talk a little bit about bitcoin for India so I unfortunately could make it last year because of clashes and stuff but I'm looking forward to being there off the top my head is October 14th of 15th I think yeah do you want to just give us an update on bitcoin for India? Absolutely so this is this is the community piece that some of us are involved in with other volunteers but more than happy to you know put it on this platform as well that you know stiffened a little bit person there and there will be many other bitcoiners who would be there who would be you know talking to blacks in India and talking multi-seag talking pastries talking a lot of stuff you know how to do how to do probably running a node so it will be a mixed conference like like it was the standard technical track and there will be a main track but we are we are very excited about it and we are obviously going to look for more and more participation this time from speakers and from audience so this is an October 14th of 10th of the data as a song. Fantastic and in Bangalore right and so I'm also you know it's been one year now like bitcoin it will it will it will have been you've already had the first conference you've been growing this meet-up network let's say of more committed bitcoiners and so hopefully there'll be a you know a growth in the community by then and who knows maybe there will be a lot of people joining the community between now and then so maybe they'll all be there as well so looking forward to that and yeah any any other points you wanted to mention before we finish off. No I think I think by the time this probably the the part goes out the keeper Apple would be available on mainnet till now it was on testnet it is still beta but it is available mainnet so it's very easy for people to test out so do give it a run try it out with small amounts of amounts of sats and give us some feedback it is an awesome product and we hope you love it. Fantastic okay and thanks for joining me. 
